---
layout: post
title: "Thor: Ragnarok on the Burdens of Colonial Legacy"
date: 2018-06-01
---
***This essay was written for a history course on Colonizations.***

Since the success of *The Avengers* in 2012, Marvel Studios has found itself in a unique position. It has a huge fan base, and had previously attempted to discuss controversial issues in its films, from the concern of the surveillance state in *Captain America: The Winter Soldier* (2014), to American Imperialism in *Avengers: Age of Ultron*. However, given the need to cater to the preferences of causal movie goers, many of its films consciously avoided any real political engagement.

Yet, this changed with *Thor: Ragnarok*. *Ragnarok* is a tale of colonialism, a space fantasy that questions the west about their centuries-long inclination to sweep their colonial history under a rug and refusal to learn from it. The core of the Thor trilogy revolves around the notion of empire - the franchise has built on Asgard as an imperial power tasked with the responsibility of bringing order to the “nine realms”.

Both *Thor* and *The Dark World* opened with historical accounts of how Asgard “brought peace to the universe” by eliminating their enemies. However, in the third film, multiple characters have repeatedly revealed that this peace is rooted in vulnerable lies. Many of the situations Thor found himself in throughout the 2nd and 3rd film were a result of the decisions and compromises made by Odin to preserve the kingdom and its glorified legacy at a high cost, regardless of future consequences. *Thor: Ragnarok* boldly confronts the costs and devastations of empire-building. In the first act, Hela, the film’s antagonist, escaped from imprisonment after Odin’s death to reclaim her rights to the throne.

As Hela returned to the palace, she looked around and questioned, “Where do you think all this gold came from?” The clear answer is conquest, and the jewels around the planet are the relics of war. After exiling Thor, Hela ripped off the Renaissance-styled mythical murals to reveal the stories Asgard used to take pride in – Odin the warrior-king, the colonizer who went from planet to planet conquering and looting, with Hela by his side. Asgard was a colonial power that had consolidated its reign, and buried deep within Asgard’s subconsciousness are records of fierce and ruthless soldiers. The people of Asgard were once a warring community, who built their palaces and magnificent display of power through wiping out “inferior” realms and marketing it as the delivering of peace.

However, once Asgard had solidified its power, Odin began to be concerned with his image, and subsequently rebranded himself from a warrior to respected statesman. Hela’s thirst for further warfare did not agree with Odin’s desire for a benevolent new image. Desperate to hide the history of bloodshed, Odin locked Hela up, and wrote her out of the history books to cover up the role of war in the process of empire building. His easy solution was not to undo the damage that had been inflicted, but to suppress the infamous history, and gloss over their legacy of violent conquest. As Hela stared at mythical murals - the narrative of peace that Odin had built in the subsequent centuries, she mocked at the irony of how “Odin is proud of what he had, but ashamed of how he got it.”

Hela’s arrival in Thor: Ragnarok indicated the reawakening of Asgard’s past, and shook the collective consciousness of Asgardians, who had lived in ignorant yet comfortable peace for thousands of years. In the recent reign of Odin, Asgard has branded itself as the land of openness, development, and progressiveness. Memories of the destruction that formed the foundation of Asgardian prosperity and security have been conveniently forgotten, sounding frustratingly like real-world colonizers who ignored the cultures they had oppressed, instead simply assuming that they had brought the desired peace and stability to the other societies.

Asgard’s success was founded on the subjugation of the 9 realms, with Thor as a naïve beneficiary. Therefore, Hela’s main threat to Thor was not the Asgardian throne, but to his ability to see the Asgardian race in the historical narrative as innocent and even self-sacrificing. Like the people of past imperial powers, Thor was ill-equipped to deal with the existential crisis of reckoning with a kingdom built on blood, a crisis which collapsed the nobility and self-importance of his heritage. This evoked memories of how today’s powerful and successful countries have a tendency to rewrite their own history to avoid uncomfortable truths about how that power was established.

These elements highlight why *Thor: Ragnarok* is one of Marvel’s most political films. To explain the film’s nature, we need to turn to the director and scriptwriter. Taika Waititi is the Indigenous Maori director and comedian who ensured that indigenous people, culture and anti-colonial messages were prominent yet subtle throughout the film. As an indigenous New Zealander, Waititi is familiar with the concern of displacement and preservation of identity amidst the territorial and nation loss that Thor: Ragnarok revolves around. Interestingly, he played a character, Korg, an enslaved fighter on a foreign planet, who faced his reality of enslavement calmly, not out of defeat, but out of his confidence in the ability to survive through it. Korg understood the painful loss of identity and home, but remained true to himself, even when he was forced to fight or die for the entertainment of his enslavers. When he was freed, he appreciated the importance of belonging, and joins a new nation (Asgard) in their search for a new home after displacement.

Speaking of which, does the film’s title and ending reveal the resolution that Waititi believes Asgard deserves in light of its violent legacy? Like how Thor bemoaned, perhaps Ragnarok, the end of Asgard, was inevitable. Their empire was built on a foundation of lies that had continued to encourage death, destruction, and suffering across the 9 realms because of their meddling, all to maintain the Asgardians’ perception of self-importance and worth. Perhaps the only way to resolve this dilemma is to let the Asgardian system burn to the ground. Given the nature of Asgard and its skewing of history, the destruction depicted in *Thor: Ragnarok* felt like a purifying process.

The subsequent flight of the Asgardians reverses the roles of the colonizers and colonized, forcing audiences to conceptualize the society who was once conquerors, as one that will have to triumph above the horrors and trauma of war. Paradoxically, the Asgardians, a race of Norse gods, are now placed in the position of the the people they had oppressed centuries ago. As they journey towards an uncertain future, the community carries the memories, language, history, roots and idea of home with them. This reversal of roles will give rise to an empathy and understanding of the colonized’s situation for the Asgardians, and may be Waititi's hint about the ways to resolve today's hidden colonial legacy.
